shiny_toy
=========

Toy Shiny Application for Coursera's Developing Data Products
-------------------------------------------------------------

The repository contains the pair of files ui.R and server.R for a shiny application called shiny_toy.  

The application visually demonstrates how K-Means clustering depends on the initial (random) pick of centroids with which the algorithm starts off, before iterating between the grouping adjustments and the centroid adjustments.  

The application operates on a set of 100 bi-variate points, generated in R by picking 5 centroids uniformly at random within a square range in the two-dimensional plane, then generating 5 sets of 20 points each, via a bivariate normal distribution centered on each of the 5 centroids, and with an identical orthogonal covariance matrix for the 5 groups of 20 points each. So the data is in fact generated as 5 clusters of 20 points each, although the value of the standard deviation in the diagonal of the covariance matrix makes it likely to have geometric overlaps among the clusters.  

The shiny application presents the user with a slider input to pick K, the number of clusters desired from K-Means, as well as a numeric input for the user to pick a seed value which will be used for the random picking of the initial centroids at the start of the K-Means algorithm. It is through changes in the values of the seed that the user of the application can see how - for a constant value for K - the K-Means algorithm will converge on different cluster arrangements. The effect is more pronounced when larger values of K are chosen.  

The way in which the effect is demonstrated is via a two-dimensional plot on which the initial points are laid out, with 5 different point shapes (e.g., triangle, square, circle, etc.) for each set of 20 points generated by a given bivariate normal (of which there are 5, bivariate-normally distributed around the 5 "actual" centroids). The effect of changing input values (either K the cluster count, or the seed value that impacts centroid initialisation, or both) is through coloured circles that are overlaid on the original points, with colours indicating the cluster grouping which K-Means has come up with.  

The application has been uploaded to ShinyApps.io, and can be accessed as follows:  

- URL = https://macrol/shinyapps.io/shiny_toy
- user = guest
- password = dev_dat_prod


A shiny_toy.Rpres presentation has also been developed to orient the user on using the shiny application, and to instruct the user on where and how to access the application.  
